Hi, I’m Tom Sawyer, and I’m currently ABD in English and Comparative Literature at Washington University in St. Louis. Usually, I study medieval English miscellany manuscripts and their fascinating textual arrangements, with focus on Anglo-Latin and Middle English poetry of the twelfth through fourteenth centuries. When I’m feeling adventurous, I sometimes dabble in the fifteenth century as well! My current research focuses on Bodley 851, a positively zany composite textual object that lets me talk about two of my favorite inscrutable texts -- Walter Map's *De nugis curialium* and *Piers Plowman* (in its infamous Z-text redaction) -- at the same time. Because I attempt to read the majority of miscellaneous texts, most totally neglected in modern scholarship despite their popularity and the remainder discussed without reference to their many manuscript companions, I've titled the project *How to Read a Medieval Book* -- something I also rush to insist book historians and textual scholars alike are already very good at!

In the future, I'll look to expand my miscellaneous repertoire after a systematic fashion in a data-driven project that considers satirical and bibulous Anglo-Latin texts -- often inefficiently termed "goliardic" -- as members of a broad manuscript network.

But for the time being I’m learning how to “build a professional website” – so thanks for visiting this work in progress. Look for major improvements, and my improved facility with the gathering place of git (*id est* Github), in the near future.
